Earth man

Why are we the way we are?  What went wrong?  And how can we fix it?

I have some ideas on these matters which I need to explain in this limited series on Medium.

I will keep it as terse as possible.  I love to write but your time is valuable.

This twenty-part series will go as far as logic, mathematics, science and
verifiable facts can take us on the big picture of how we got to this point,
and how human civilization could survive the coming century.

I want to present a correct argument, so corrections, clarifications and
amplifications will be gladly accepted, though I might ignore quibbles.


* E-prime: necessary and unnecessary simplifications.

Too much information exists.

We simplify the world into concepts, symbols,
words, facts, rules, stereotypes and caricatures because it would otherwise
overwhlem us.  These simplifications unavoidably lead to mistakes, but we
persevere.

Humans have developed mental tools to reduce mistakes.

Logic and formal reasoning automatically prevent some common classes of
mistakes, if carefully applied.

Numbers and mathematics give an objective and unchanging conceptual
("Platonic") view of the world: having correct numbers doesn't make your
argument right, but having incorrect numbers definitely makes your argument
wrong.

I would like to keep my mistake rate as low as possible, so I'm going to keep it
brief, but I'd like to keep my logical error rate down too, so I write these
articles in a dialect of English called E-prime.

A Polish mathematician named Korzybsky pointed out that many logical errors in
European languages, particularly English, stem from the fact that the verb "to
be" has a very imprecise meaning.

What does a statement like "Knowledge is power" mean?  It does not equate
"knowledge" and "power" because these are two different concepts, but says
something amorphous like, "Some Knowledge can be used to achieve some of what
you wish".

Or consider, "Mike is a crook."  But at this moment, Mike sleeps. What crookness
"is" there about him right now?  Can I measure it somehow?  I once stole a juice
from a store when I was a kid.  "Am" I a crook?  "Was" I a crook then and if so,
for how long?

The verb "to be" simplifies the world to the point of gross inaccuracy.

Avoiding "to be" or its conjugations like "was" forces more precision and
accurate speech: "I suspect that Mike did some dishonest things", or "I believe
that Mike committed crimes," or "Public evidence exists showing that Mike has
committed crimes," or "I believe Mike plans to rob from his busines," or "at
about the age of ten, I stole a drink from a shop".

So I write these articles in E-prime.  Please correct any errors which will
undoubtedly creep in.

Part one: a deconstruction of humans.


* The ego

The probability that only humans ever read this article nears 100%.

Plenty of computer programs will process this text, but a consciousness actually
reading and comprehending this has a near certainty of being human.

You reading this paper from existing "inside" a human being and "looking out" at
the universe, which contains these words you currently readi.

(The quotes mean uncertainty exists as to whether "you" exist separately inside
the human being that reads this!  We call this idea, "Cartesian duality",
which means that "you" "are" "in" "the human", named after Rene Descarte, the
first in Western philosophy to discuss this, but this matter isn't important to
the whole argument.)

Whether or you believe in the soul, it is both intuitively obvio

The tininess of an individual human in the entire scale of things cannot be
understood by that human (Douglas Adams, RIP).

The Earth weighs roughly 6 sextillion tons.  My entire life has run in
close communion with numbers and I can manipulate such gargantuan figures with
ease, and tell you that if evenly shared, you would get one quarter quadrillion
tons, more or less 3 trillion times your weight in mostly rock in some form or
another, but that has no actual meaning to me beyond the arithmetic.

And the Earth appears as a tiny speck in the universe.  You can span the all the
scales in the universe in four really huge jumps of very, very, roughly the same
size:

  from an atom to a dust mote
  from a dust mote to the Earth
  from the Earth to the Milky Way galaxy
  from the galaxy to the universe

and the size of a human falls somewhere between a dust mote and the entire
Earth in that list.

The impossibility of correctly handling the scales that exist in the universe
leads to a various sorts of cognitive errors - a fancy world for "common
mistake" -- on the part of human beings; the first part of this series dedicates
itself to describing them.


* Timescales and risk: Risk, hyperbolic discounting and hyperobjects

Humans constantly play a sort of game with the universe where they attempt to
maximume their "profits" and minimize their "losses" where dying stands close to
the top of the scale of loss.

This works because humans possess a truly magnificent computational engine which
can solve amazingly hard problems almost instantaneously.

A famous Internet video from a surveillance camera show a man almost hit by an
out-of-control car.  He walks, he sees the car, he pauses for perhaps half a
second, then jumps out of the way in precisely the right direction, the car
rushes past him and collides with a store, causing major havoc (luckily we see
no humans get injured) and our hero brushes himself then trots over to see if he
can help.

An amazing display of planning, agility and coordination, this little
performance lasted for a very short amount of time with a completely unprepared
human, but with flawless results.

I personally have experienced several scrapes, at least one as bad as this one,
and just did the right thing "without thinking".

I should already have reminded you that the set of animals includes all a human
beings.  We belong to the genus homo sapiens, "wise man" -- I would prefer "homo
callidus", "clever man", but we must use the standard terms.

Your average ape, monkey, or even a dog, a cat, a goat or a fox or birds or a
huge number of creatures would do very well in similar scenario of "dodge the
suddenly danger".  Look at the difficulties a human faces in catching a
seeningly primitive mosquito.

The Theory of Evolution provide a very good explanation as to why we have all
these amazing capabilities.

Very simple, boring life originated on the Earth billions of years ago. All
the complexity we see now appeared gradually through a process named Natural
Selection, first fully described by Charles Darwin around XXXX.

Variations naturally occur within any species of living creatures, for reasons
such as copying errors in their DNA.

Some variations within a species survive better or reproduce better, and we call
this "fitness"; fitter variations naturally dominate the species over
generations because they do not get killed, or they have more children, or both.

Gradual improvements in fitness over the aeons, coupled with the tremendous
diversity of environments on Earth and the free availability of energy and
elements like carbon, oxygen, hydrogen and a host of trace elements in
accessible forms, led to whales, mushrooms, beetles, archaebacteria, the
platypus and h. sapiens - us.

The ability to react to the outside world appeared fairly late - natural
selection led creatures to eat other creatures and avoid being eaten.

Human consciousness can be described




* Game theory, the prisoner's dilemma and cheats, Kant's categorical imperative

* Mathematics, magic and the contradiction

* Gods, personalization and mirror neurons - how to summon the Holy Guardian Angel

* Summary


: individualism, the selection effect and the anthropic principle


Part two: what has gone wrong?
------------------------------------

* The Terracide is the greatest crime in history

* Industrial capitalism is constantly revolting and consumerism is its profhit.
  Free markets are not free because they are built on a tissue of lies

* Idiomania and the fountain of filth

* A nest of ASPs - how the psychos stole everyone's tomorrow

* Now... this: the theft of depth and meaning Premonition of the apocalypse

* Summary


Part three: how could it be fixed?
-------------------------------------

* My favorite Martian: looking back from 2332

* Population overshoot and the transition
 * brace yourselves, this part won't be pretty

* We take over

* Who are We and how do We make decisions?


Glossary:

  idiomania/idiomaniac
  premonia/premonic
  veme/beme
